<div style="float:right;margin:auto"><ebook-button title="Electrolytes" link="https://genchem.science.psu.edu/14-2-electrolytes"></ebook-button></div>

# Electrolytes

Conductivity is the ability to conduct electricity. For a substance, mixture, or solution to conduct electricity, it must contain charged particles that are free to move or migrate. In a conductive solution dissolved ions are the mobile charged particles. When an electrical potential is applied to a solution with a small AA battery (as shown in the diagram) negatively charged ions migrate towards the positive electrode and positively charged ions migrate towards the negative electrode (indicated by the yellow arrows).  In other words, opposites attract, a concept we are familiar with. This movement of charged particles is an electrical current. 

Electrolytes are substances that dissolve in water and dissociate into ions. Substances can be classified into three categories: strong electrolytes, weak electrolytes, and nonelectrolytes. Strong electrolytes dissociate completely into ions when dissolved in water. These include ionic compounds (salts) such as sodium chloride, which dissociates in water to form Na$$^+$$ and Cl$$^-$$ ions. Strong electrolytes also include strong acids, which react completely with water to produce ions (Cl$$^-$$ and hydronium $$H_3O^+$$). Solutions containing strong electrolytes are good conductors because the ions produced when these substances dissociate allow the solution to conduct electricity. 

Weak electrolytes are substances, when dissolved in water, only a fraction of the molecules dissociate into ions. These include weak bases and weak acids. Broadly speaking, weak bases contain an amine functional group. Weak bases, such as ammonia ($$NH_3$$), partially react with water to form ions. In the case of ammonia, $$NH_4^+$$ and $$OH^-$$ ions are produced. Only a small fraction of ammonia reacts to form these ions, and thus the vast majority of the ammonia molecules remain neutrally charged. Since very few ions are produced, solutions of weak bases are poor conductors. Similarly, weak acids are acids that only partially react with water to produce ions. A weak acid is an acid that isn't one of the seven strong acids. Typically, an inorganic acid's molecular formula starts with an H.  Organic acids contain a carboxylic acid functional group. An example is acetic acid ($$CH_3COOH$$). A minor fraction of acetic acid reacts with water to form acetate ($$CH_3COO^-$$) and hydronium ions, but the  majority of acetic acid does not react and instead remains neutrally charged. Since very few ions are produced, solutions of weak acids are poor conductors. 

Nonelectrolytes are substances that do not dissociate into ions when dissolved in water. An example is glucose, which remains neutrally charged when dissolved in solution. Since no ions are produced, solutions of nonelectrolytes are nonconductive.

[ciscode|rev=1|tool=elmsmedia|item=3772|entity_type=node|render=display_mode|display_mode=mediavideo]